Progress Report - February 2022 (#311)
yuzu-emu/yuzu-emu.github.io: site/content/entry/yuzu-progress-report-feb-2022/index.md

+++
date = "2022-03-08T12:00:00-03:00"
title = "Progress Report February 2022"
author = "GoldenX86"
coauthor = "Honghoa"
forum = 0
+++

> Glad to have you here, yuz-ers! This month we're proud to showcase a ton of kernel changes that finally fix long standing bugs, massive performance improvements, UI and input changes, and more!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Glad to have you here, yuz-ers! This month, we're proud to showcase a ton of kernel changes that finally fix long standing bugs, massive performance improvements, UI and input changes, and more!
```

Using this extension allows the API to dynamically change these members in the structure with a simple function call, eliminating the need to create a whole new object, thus, reducing the amount of resources used by the operation.

While this bug is being resolved upstream, [epicboy](https://github.com/ameerj) pushed a PR to {{< gh-hovercard "7953" "blacklist the extension" >}} on RDNA2 devices running RADV drivers, so yuzu does not outright crash.

But there was still one more driver with problems for us out there.

Mesa's ANV driver on Linux does not support the texture format `VK_FORMAT_B5G6R5_UNORM_PACK16`, and this caused yuzu to crash when running a game that made use of it, such as `Bowser's Fury`.
To bypass this problem, [voidanix](https://github.com/voidanix) implemented a solution that emulates `BGR565` textures by {{< gh-hovercard "7913" "swizzling the RGB565 format" >}} instead.

In a similar vein, [Morph](https://github.com/Morph1984) implemented a {{< gh-hovercard "7948" "missing vertex format" >}}, used by the title `パワプロクンポケットR` (Power Pro Kun Pocket R).

> [asLody](https://github.com/asLody), also implemented a missing {{< gh-hovercard "7939" "framebuffer format" >}}, used by `Yokai-watch 4`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[asLody](https://github.com/asLody) also implemented a missing {{< gh-hovercard "7939" "framebuffer format" >}}, this time used by `Yokai-watch 4`.
```

{{< imgs

> 	"./ykw4.png| The real name technically is 妖怪ウォッチ4 ぼくらは同じ空を見上げている"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
	"./ykw4.png| The original name is technically 妖怪ウォッチ4 ぼくらは同じ空を見上げている"
```

Reviewer 2: If we're keeping the runes, then I personally would prefer to add a transcription, since not everybody can read moonrunes.
`Youkai Watch 4 Bokura wa Onaji Sora wo Miageteiru`
Or perhaps just using the transcription directly would be more suitable? Or maybe, a localization of the title?
`Youkai Watch 4: We all look up to the same sky`, or whatever the developers tried to do whenever they gave the game this purple title. Not a fan of localizing it since it's not official, though.

> [asLody](https://github.com/asLody) also implemented a missing {{< gh-hovercard "7939" "framebuffer format" >}}, this time used by `Yokai-watch 4`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[asLody](https://github.com/asLody) also implemented a missing {{< gh-hovercard "7939" "framebuffer format" >}}, this time used by `Yo-kai Watch 4`.
```

> 	"./ykw4.png| The original name is technically 妖怪ウォッチ4 ぼくらは同じ空を見上げている (Youkai Watch 4 Bokura wa Onaji Sora wo Miageteiru)"

Reviewer: Is this translated version supposed to spell it as "Youkai" when the game seems to be officially spelled "Yo-kai"?

Reviewer 2: Actually, that's a good question. The word is written in japanese with the characters equivalent for "yo", "u", "ka", "i".

"Yo-kai" is just a trademark thing, like "Pokémon". There is no concept of "é" in japanese, just as "Yo-kai" is just a fancy way to write "Youkai".

Since a transcription is meant to render characters from one script using the characters of another one, we should actually change "Watch" to "Wotchi", which is how it is transcribed into japanese (I was too tired to notice this yesterday).

-> `Youkai Wotchi Bokura wa Onaji Sora wo Miageteiru`.

  >}}

> Another addition by this author was {{< gh-hovercard "7930" "adding missing semaphore operations" >}} for `MaxwellDMA`, used  by `Legend of Zelda: Breath of the Wild` and `Pokémon Legends: Arceus`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Another fix by this developer was {{< gh-hovercard "7930" "adding missing semaphore operations" >}} for `MaxwellDMA`, used  by `Legend of Zelda: Breath of the Wild` and `Pokémon Legends: Arceus`.
```

## Kernel changes, and how to tame Smash

Continuing with the ongoing work on the kernel, [bunnei](https://github.com/bunnei) has {{< gh-hovercard "7956" "revamped the kernel memory manager" >}} to make it more compatible with the latest system updates.

One neat setting that came along with these changes is the ability for yuzu to support different memory layouts, such as the "6 GB extended memory layout", used in developer units (a feature requested by the modding community).
 

> Some mods can take more RAM than the Switch can provide, mainly high resolution texture replacements.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Some mods can utilize more RAM than the Switch can provide, mainly high resolution texture replacements.
```

To solve this issue, bunnei {{< gh-hovercard "7932" "added a toggle to enable the extended 6GB memory layout" >}} that real developer kits would have available.
Those extra 2GB will allow heavy mods to work without issues. 
You can find the setting in `Emulation > Configure… > General > Extended memory layout (6GB DRAM)`.

{{< imgs
	"./6gb.png| Mod away!"
  >}}

Don’t expect it to make a difference in emulation performance, games will not care if the emulated console has more than 4GB, they only care about having enough free memory for their operations.

> bunnei has also been improving the accuracy of the page table management, by {{< gh-hovercard "7835" "migrating locks to using emulated guest locks" >}} and {{< gh-hovercard "7919" "improving the mapping and unmapping of physical memory" >}}.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
bunnei has also been improving the accuracy of the page table management by {{< gh-hovercard "7835" "migrating locks to using emulated guest locks" >}} and {{< gh-hovercard "7919" "improving the mapping and unmapping of physical memory" >}}.
```

ARM is able to control this behaviour through a piece of hardware called the `Exclusive Monitor`.
But emulating these instructions accurately on the `x64` architecture can be very difficult, given the complex nature of testing and debugging in a multithreaded environment.
Thus, their previous implementation was rather conservative and inefficient, to ensure concurrency.

It is possible, however, to approximate the original behaviour through the use of `cmpxchg`, which compares the value in the memory address with a reference, and if they match, it writes a new value into it.
Thus, one can use the value in a memory address as the reference, and later write another value into the same address if, and only if, the stored value matches the reference.
Relying on the semantics of this instruction, exclusive memory reads and writes can be inlined into the JITed code and speed up their execution.

Titles that make extensive use of these exclusive instructions, such as `Pokémon Legends: Arceus`, should see a slight increase in performance.

{{< imgs
	"./gnv.png| Some Nvidia numbers"
  >}}

{{< imgs

> 	"./gamd.png| And some AMD ones"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
	"./gamd.png| Some AMD numbers"
```

  >}}

## General bugfixes and UI changes

[german77](https://github.com/german77) did some work on the UI to spice things up.

> He {{< gh-hovercard "7859" "improved SDL battery level detection" >}}, realigned some of the UI elements in the control settings, {{< gh-hovercard "7839" "and gave us new prettier battery symbols!" >}}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
He {{< gh-hovercard "7859" "improved SDL battery level detection" >}}, realigned some of the UI elements in the control settings, {{< gh-hovercard "7839" "and gave us new, prettier battery symbols!" >}}
```

{{< single-title-imgs-compare
	"Cute and simple!"
	"./batteryold.png"
	"./batterynew.png"
>}}

german77 also {{< gh-hovercard "7861" "added new hotkeys" >}} by popular request.
Joining the fray are Docked/Undocked (for controllers), Window Adapting Filter, GPU accuracy (switches between normal and high), and mute/unmute audio.

{{< imgs
	"./hotkeys.png| Once you master the hotkey-jutsu, no one will be able to stop you"
  >}}

> Another very requested fix was {{< gh-hovercard "7867" "improving Amiibo support" >}}.
> Our old code wasn’t very accurate, leading to several games failing.
> While there is room for improvement, this new implementation is far more accurate and should allow stable use of Amiibo dumps on most games now.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Another highly requested fix was {{< gh-hovercard "7867" "improving Amiibo support" >}}.
Our old code wasn’t very accurate, leading to several games failing.
While there is room for improvement, this new implementation is far more accurate and should allow stable use of Amiibo dumps in most games now.
```

> Native support for NFC scanning of physical Amiibos is being worked on.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We also want to announce that native support for NFC scanning of physical Amiibos is being worked on! We'll have more information to share as progress is made.
```

Morph fixed a weird issue that’s been appearing lately.

> Under some circumstances, after reopening yuzu, the window would be a maximized borderless *thing*.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Under some circumstances, after reopening yuzu, the window would be a maximized borderless... *thing*.
```

> Turns out, for some reason the configuration file was not resetting the frameless flag after closing yuzu.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As it turns out, for some reason the configuration file was not resetting the frameless flag after closing yuzu.
```

{{< gh-hovercard "7849" "Forcing a removal of the flag" >}} at each boot solves the issue.

[Maide](https://github.com/Kelebek1) added a very useful feature to modders and anyone interested in the internals of their games. 
Previously, yuzu dumped the base `exeFS`, which only includes data from the base game, missing any new addition from updates or DLCs.
Instead, by {{< gh-hovercard "7899" "dumping the patched `exeFS`" >}}, like [EliEron](https://github.com/EliEron) {{< gh-hovercard "4341" "suggested in the past" >}}, users will have access to update files!

[toastUnlimited](https://github.com/lat9nq) found out that `Splatoon 2` crashes when accessing the inventory in the [LAN lobby](https://yuzu-emu.org/entry/yuzu-progress-report-aug-2021/#lan-party-time).
{{< gh-hovercard "7887" "Stubbing the `IsUsbFullKeyControllerEnabled` function" >}} is all that was needed.
Splat your friends with impunity!

{{< imgs

> 	"./splat.png| With all that ink dissipating to the atmosphere, rain must be fantastic"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
	"./splat.png| With all that ink evaporating into the atmosphere, rain must be fantastic"
```

  >}}

For retro gaming fans, both toastUnlimited and german77 have fixes for the SNES and NES emulators included with the Nintendo Switch Online service (yes, you can dump and play those offline too).

> {{< gh-hovercard "7878" "Stubbing`mnpp:app`" >}} solves crashes, and {{< gh-hovercard "7877" "Updating the process revision" >}} of our audio emulation allows the official emulators to work properly on yuzu.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{{< gh-hovercard "7878" "Stubbing`mnpp:app`" >}} solves crashes, and {{< gh-hovercard "7877" "updating the process revision" >}} of our audio emulation allows the official emulators to work properly on yuzu.
```

{{< single-title-imgs
    "Our team members are big Earthbound fans"
    "./nes.png"
    "./snes.png"
    "./snes2.png"
    "./snes3.png"
  >}}

## Input improvements

As it happens each month, german77 dominates this section.

> As a way to test how strong the current rumble setting is, now you can {{< gh-hovercard "7842" "force the controller to vibrate" >}} by pressing any button while the Configure Vibration window is open.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As a way to test how strong the current rumble setting is, you can now {{< gh-hovercard "7842" "force the controller to vibrate" >}} by pressing any button while the Configure Vibration window is open.
```

{{< imgs
	"./rumble.png| Joy-Con goes BRRRR"
  >}}

> Gamepads have drift, but not only in the exaggerated fashion Joy-Cons are known for, every gamepad has a certain degree of drifting to it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Gamepads have drift, not only in the exaggerated fashion Joy-Cons are known for, but every gamepad has a certain degree of drifting to it.
```

To hide this, consoles auto-center their sticks.

On yuzu, one of the limitations of [SDL](https://www.libsdl.org/) is that it will only read the factory calibration on a Nintendo official controller, skipping any user calibration profile that may be available.
We counter this by auto-centering at boot, but sticks can still go anywhere they like, so german77 {{< gh-hovercard "7860" "adds an option to manually center each axis" >}} as an additional option.
Just right click any direction of a stick in our controller settings.

{{< imgs
	"./center.png| Just one right click away"
  >}}

Support was added to {{< gh-hovercard "7900" "allow mapping the Enter key" >}}, which previously just restarted the mapping process.

toastUnlimited {{< gh-hovercard "7851" "added support for motion inputs" >}} to `yuzu-cmd`, our terminal version of the executable. 
Terminal warriors can now enjoy some Just Dance too.

## Improving emulation to not use emulation

[xerpi](https://github.com/xerpi) {{< gh-hovercard "7866" "implemented the 32 bit version" >}} of the `OutputDebugString`, `CreateCodeMemory`, and `ControlCodeMemory` supervisor calls. Thanks!

> xerpi’s help has a bigger objective in mind than just helping some weird Switch emulator.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
xerpi’s help has a bigger objective in mind than just helping some little-known Switch emulator.
```

They’re developing [vita2hos](https://github.com/xerpi/vita2hos), a translation layer to run `PlayStation Vita` apps and games natively on the Nintendo Switch!
The road ahead is long, since most Switch debug tools are 64-bit only, and the Vita is firmly a 32-bit console, so several rewrites and changes are in order to get the project going.

yuzu lacks some functionality to offer full 32-bit execution mode support, so the PR was opened to help improve that area, since xerpi is using Switch emulators to assist and ease development.
We can’t wait to see how this project grows!

## Vulkan is the future

With the work on `Project Y.F.C` and other changes scheduled, we’re slowly aiming for enabling Vulkan by default, and keeping OpenGL in long term support.

> This section will not list changes in yuzu, but settings users can tweak to improve their Vulkan performance on yuzu and other emulators.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This section will not list changes in yuzu, but settings users can tweak to improve their Vulkan performance in yuzu and other emulators.
```

This can disable the warranty of your Radeon product.

What needs to be done, in a similar way to NVIDIA, is to add yuzu as a profile on the `Gaming` tab, click on `Tune Game Performance` and set Tuning Control to `Custom`. 
Enable GPU Tuning and you will be able to tweak the `Min. Frequency (%)`.

{{< imgs
	"./radeon1.png| While this can be set globally on Radeon Software, we recommend to use per-application profiles"
  >}}

{{< imgs
	"./radeon2.png| Besides the GPU, increasing the memory clock speeds will always help in emulation, especially at high resolutions"
  >}}

Using a humble (and worse than mediocre) RX 6500 XT as an example, we can see `Pokémon Legends: Arceus` increase its framerate up to 73% *for free*, managing to surpass an RX 570 at ease, simply by raising the minimum clock speed from 500MHz to 2875MHz (a 475% increase, as the next graph shows).

{{< imgs
	"./radgraph.png| Too much power-saving can also be a bad thing"
  >}}

The performance gains here can be massive, but one can start to see diminishing returns past a certain point.

## Future projects

`Project Y.F.C.` continues to mature as more previously broken games start to become playable.

> Blinkhawk informs us that he changes focus to performance. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Blinkhawk informs us that he's currently changing focus to performance. 
```
